---
layout: post
title: "Day 11: Bridge to Horton (Testing), Bridge to Horton 3"
date: 2020-06-16 13:00:00 +0900
categories: cclib
---

Continuing what I was working on yesterday, I have finished writing a sensible test for `horton 2` bridge in `cclib`. It basically exploits the fact that both `horton 2` and `cclib` can read from `fchk` files generated by Gaussian. The test compares the parsed and converted values in both directions.

I have also fixed small typos to complete the bridge between `horton 2` and `cclib`. I then worked on to provide a similar functionality with `horton 3` `IOData` (sub)package. Most of the data structure stays same in the newer version, although many variables were renamed. Also, it uses some type-checking that was made available in Python 3. When `cclib` also decides to move completely to Python 3, I foresee that similar type checking may be enforced in `cclib` level and the checks in the bridge can be dropped.

As suggested by Dr. Langner, one of my mentors, I think it is worth considering whether it would be better to pass in `ccData` object as argument for the bridge function. Although I have chosen to do so in my first version of the code, I saw that other bridge functions already available in `cclib` chose to ask for each attribute of `ccData` object as separate arguments. While I chose to be consistent, I see that there are some advantages of using `ccData` object directly as function argument, especially in horton bridge in that some version checking and naming convention confusion can be relieved from the users. I suppose I should be able to discuss more about this in the daily session.

